# Benefits

This example helps you deploy your code to AWS ECS Fargate
and manage execution in the CloudReactor website. Below
are the benefits of both.

## Why should I use ECS?

Using AWS ECS with the Fargate execution method to run tasks has several benefits:

1) Near infinite scalability -- run as many task instances as you want at any time
2) No need to manage EC2 instances -- security patches, library upgrades, library
compatibility issues, downtime. This leads to increased reliability and more time for 
developers.
3) Running Docker images leads to more predictable, isolated execution. Here's [a good summary
of the advantages of Docker](https://www.linode.com/docs/applications/containers/when-and-why-to-use-docker/).
4) Only pay for the CPU/memory you reserve while your tasks are running
5) Reliable scheduling by AWS without a separate scheduling server

## Why should I use CloudReactor?

The volume and complexity of data generated by companies is always growing: your Customer Success team just set up a ticket-tracking system and wants to pull metrics from it. Engineering wants to monitor data deliveries to customers, or from suppliers. Finance wants to join marketing data with revenue data to measure lifetime value by channel.

All these requests require data ETL tasks to be written, and over time, these tasks accumulate. As they accumulate, ensuring these tasks run smoothly takes up more and more engineering time. For example, understanding the current status of each of these tasks becomes more burdensome. Because there are so many different tasks, it becomes harder to know when a given task fails. If a task fails or encounters an error, you need to quickly figure out what the error was, and remediate -- perhaps restarting the infrastructure and task, perhaps pinpointing and fixing the code or data issue.